README.md, before:

rpi-sdr-replay
==============

**Turns Raspberry Pi into a remotely controlled software Defined Radio (SDR)
transceiver that captures and replays radio signals.**

Use your Android smartphone to control when the radio signal recording should start,
when it should end and then replay it on your discretion. 


Usage
=====

Command line (The server part)
-----------------------------

TBD

Graphical SmartPhone BlueDot app interface (The client part)
------------------------------------------------------------

TBD


Hardware requirements
=====================

* Raspberry Pi with Bluetooth ([that supports rpitx](https://github.com/F5OEO/rpitx#hardware))
  * I use **RaspberryPi Zero WH**
* RTL-SDR dongle
  * There are multiple ones
  * I use [RTL-SDR V3](https://www.rtl-sdr.com)


Setup
=====

Raspbian packages
-----------------

    $ sudo apt install \
        build-essential \
        python3-dbus \
        python3-pip \
        git \
        rtl-sdr


Python libraries
----------------

*Note: Before you install python modules by pip, you should consider
use of a python virtual environments. See next section of this readme.*

    $ pip install -r requirements.txt


RTL-SDR setup
-------------

Raspbian system packages got installed in one of previous steps when
**rtl-sdr** package was installed.

Now you need to **blacklist default kernel modules with drivers for RTL-SDR**
chipset that are used for DVB-T decoding.

Depending on the chipset your dongle has, you need to blacklist the correct
kernel module. If you are not sure, you can uncomment all names and blacklist
all of them:

    $ sudo vim /etc/modprobe.d/blacklist-rtl-sdr-dvbt-modules.conf

And add:

    blacklist dvb_usb_rtl28xxu
    blacklist 8192cu
    blacklist rtl8xxxu
    #blacklist rtl2832
    #blacklist rtl2830

Note: Make sure you removed the hash symbol ``#`` from the beggining of the
line that lists the name of kernel module for chipset of your RTL-SDR dongle.
In this example I only blacklist a sub-set of them.

Once done, try to plug in the dongle and run this command to test it:

    $ rtl_test


rpitx setup
-----------

rpitx is a general radio frequency transmitter for Raspberry Pi which doesn't
require any other hardware unless filter to avoid intererence. It can handle
frequencies from 5 KHz up to 1500 MHz.

Project repository: https://github.com/F5OEO/rpitx

Installation instructions:

    $ git clone https://github.com/F5OEO/rpitx
    $ cd rpitx
    $ ./install.sh
    $ sudo reboot


Bluetooth permissions
---------------------

    $ sudo vim /etc/dbus-1/system.d/bluetooth.conf

Add this section (assuming your user is "pi"):

      <policy user="pi">
        <allow own="org.bluez"/>
        <allow send_destination="org.bluez"/>
        <allow send_interface="org.bluez.Agent1"/>
        <allow send_interface="org.bluez.MediaEndpoint1"/>
        <allow send_interface="org.bluez.MediaPlayer1"/>
        <allow send_interface="org.bluez.Profile1"/>
        <allow send_interface="org.bluez.GattCharacteristic1"/>
        <allow send_interface="org.bluez.GattDescriptor1"/>
        <allow send_interface="org.bluez.LEAdvertisement1"/>
        <allow send_interface="org.freedesktop.DBus.ObjectManager"/>
        <allow send_interface="org.freedesktop.DBus.Properties"/>
      </policy>

Restart dbus:

    $ sudo systemctl restart dbus


Raspberry Pi and Android Phone pairing
--------------------------------------

**On Raspberry command line:**

    $ bluetoothctl
    discoverable on
    pairable on
    agent on
    default-agent

Note: You will need to confirm the pairing there in the console once you
attempt to pair with the Raspberry Pi from your phone (see the next section).

**On your Android phone:**

* Enable Bluetooth and search for a new device.
  * The name will be most likely "**raspberrypi**" and its MAC address
    must match the MAC address reported by the bluetoothctl after
    you run ``discoverable on``.
* Pair your phone and the Raspberry Pi device.

Once the devices are paired, quit the bluetoothctl console by pressing
``Ctrl + D``.

Blue Dot Android app
--------------------

Install the [**Blue Dot**](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.stuffaboutcode.bluedot)
from Google Play store.

Once you run the app, you should be able to select the correct bluetooth
device (the raspberry you paired in the previous step).

Test Blue Dot setup
-------------------

Run this on your Raspberry:

    $ python3

    from bluedot import BlueDot
    bd = BlueDot()
    bd.wait_for_press()
    print("Button was pressed!")

Then run the Blue Dot app on your smartphone, select the raspberry from the
list of paired devices and after a connection is made, press the blue button!
The code adobe should print out a message "Button was pressed!" once once
the blue button is pressed.


Policy kit permissions to Turn Off (Shut Down) the system
---------------------------------------------------------

The app allows you to properly turn off the Raspberry Pi system, but to be
able to do that, the user running the application must have permissions
to do that. To configure that permissions, do the following:

Create and edit a PolicyKit permission:

    $ sudo vim /etc/polkit-1/localauthority/50-local.d/allow_all_users_to_shutdown.pkla

And add there:

    [Allow all users to shutdown]
    Identity=unix-user:*
    Action=org.freedesktop.login1.power-off;org.freedesktop.login1.power-off-multiple-sessions
    ResultActive=yes
    ResultAny=yes

Reload the PolicyKit:

    sudo systemctl daemon-reload


Installation in virtual env
===========================

**1)** Install all necessary packages:

    sudo apt-get install virtualenv virtualenvwrapper

**2)** Add the next two lines at the bottom of your ``~/.profile`` file:

    export WORKON_HOME=~/.virtualenvs
    source /usr/share/virtualenvwrapper/virtualenvwrapper.sh

Note: If you have ~/.bash_profile file, then you need to add it there
as in that case the ``~/.profile`` won't be read.

**3)** Create a virtual env

    mkvirtualenv \
        --system-site-packages \
        --python=/usr/bin/python3 \
        rpi-sdr-replay

Note: We are allowing system site python packages to be available in our
virtual env here.

**When you are ready to work** on the new virtual env

    workon rpi-sdr-replay

**Once you are done** deactivate the virtual env

    deactivate


Debugging
=========

Bluetooth
---------

Bluetooth live debugging:

    sudo btmon

Some other tips for bluetooth debugging:
https://fedoraproject.org/wiki/How_to_debug_Bluetooth_problems

RTL-SDR
-------

Test RTL-SDR dongle

    rtl_test

Commit message:

README: Add section about sudo access to /usr/bin/sendiq without password

README.md, after:

rpi-sdr-replay
==============

**Turns Raspberry Pi into a remotely controlled software Defined Radio (SDR)
transceiver that captures and replays radio signals.**

Use your Android smartphone to control when the radio signal recording should start,
when it should end and then replay it on your discretion. 


Usage
=====

Command line (The server part)
-----------------------------

TBD

Graphical SmartPhone BlueDot app interface (The client part)
------------------------------------------------------------

TBD


Hardware requirements
=====================

* Raspberry Pi with Bluetooth ([that supports rpitx](https://github.com/F5OEO/rpitx#hardware))
  * I use **RaspberryPi Zero WH**
* RTL-SDR dongle
  * There are multiple ones
  * I use [RTL-SDR V3](https://www.rtl-sdr.com)


Setup
=====

Raspbian packages
-----------------

    $ sudo apt install \
        build-essential \
        python3-dbus \
        python3-pip \
        git \
        rtl-sdr


Python libraries
----------------

*Note: Before you install python modules by pip, you should consider
use of a python virtual environments. See next section of this readme.*

    $ pip install -r requirements.txt


RTL-SDR setup
-------------

Raspbian system packages got installed in one of previous steps when
**rtl-sdr** package was installed.

Now you need to **blacklist default kernel modules with drivers for RTL-SDR**
chipset that are used for DVB-T decoding.

Depending on the chipset your dongle has, you need to blacklist the correct
kernel module. If you are not sure, you can uncomment all names and blacklist
all of them:

    $ sudo vim /etc/modprobe.d/blacklist-rtl-sdr-dvbt-modules.conf

And add:

    blacklist dvb_usb_rtl28xxu
    blacklist 8192cu
    blacklist rtl8xxxu
    #blacklist rtl2832
    #blacklist rtl2830

Note: Make sure you removed the hash symbol ``#`` from the beggining of the
line that lists the name of kernel module for chipset of your RTL-SDR dongle.
In this example I only blacklist a sub-set of them.

Once done, try to plug in the dongle and run this command to test it:

    $ rtl_test


rpitx setup
-----------

rpitx is a general radio frequency transmitter for Raspberry Pi which doesn't
require any other hardware unless filter to avoid intererence. It can handle
frequencies from 5 KHz up to 1500 MHz.

Project repository: https://github.com/F5OEO/rpitx

Installation instructions:

    $ git clone https://github.com/F5OEO/rpitx
    $ cd rpitx
    $ ./install.sh
    $ sudo reboot


Bluetooth permissions
---------------------

    $ sudo vim /etc/dbus-1/system.d/bluetooth.conf

Add this section (assuming your user is "pi"):

      <policy user="pi">
        <allow own="org.bluez"/>
        <allow send_destination="org.bluez"/>
        <allow send_interface="org.bluez.Agent1"/>
        <allow send_interface="org.bluez.MediaEndpoint1"/>
        <allow send_interface="org.bluez.MediaPlayer1"/>
        <allow send_interface="org.bluez.Profile1"/>
        <allow send_interface="org.bluez.GattCharacteristic1"/>
        <allow send_interface="org.bluez.GattDescriptor1"/>
        <allow send_interface="org.bluez.LEAdvertisement1"/>
        <allow send_interface="org.freedesktop.DBus.ObjectManager"/>
        <allow send_interface="org.freedesktop.DBus.Properties"/>
      </policy>

Restart dbus:

    $ sudo systemctl restart dbus


Raspberry Pi and Android Phone pairing
--------------------------------------

**On Raspberry command line:**

    $ bluetoothctl
    discoverable on
    pairable on
    agent on
    default-agent

Note: You will need to confirm the pairing there in the console once you
attempt to pair with the Raspberry Pi from your phone (see the next section).

**On your Android phone:**

* Enable Bluetooth and search for a new device.
  * The name will be most likely "**raspberrypi**" and its MAC address
    must match the MAC address reported by the bluetoothctl after
    you run ``discoverable on``.
* Pair your phone and the Raspberry Pi device.

Once the devices are paired, quit the bluetoothctl console by pressing
``Ctrl + D``.

Blue Dot Android app
--------------------

Install the [**Blue Dot**](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.stuffaboutcode.bluedot)
from Google Play store.

Once you run the app, you should be able to select the correct bluetooth
device (the raspberry you paired in the previous step).

Test Blue Dot setup
-------------------

Run this on your Raspberry:

    $ python3

    from bluedot import BlueDot
    bd = BlueDot()
    bd.wait_for_press()
    print("Button was pressed!")

Then run the Blue Dot app on your smartphone, select the raspberry from the
list of paired devices and after a connection is made, press the blue button!
The code adobe should print out a message "Button was pressed!" once once
the blue button is pressed.


sudo access to /usr/bin/sendiq without password
-----------------------------------------------

The app is using ``/usr/bin/sendiq`` tool, that must be run as root (via ``sudo``).
If you want to use this app, you must make sure the user that is running the server side
has permission to run the ``sendiq`` tool via sudo without asking for password.

There are multiple ways how to achieve that. By default in Raspbian, the default **"pi"** user
usually has ability to use sudo without password for any command.

If you have your own user that by default requires password for sudo, make sure you update
your sudoers configuration to allow the ``/usr/bin/sendiq`` without the password:

    $ sudo visudo

and add a line (where "youruser" is the name of the user you use):

    youruser ALL=(root) NOPASSWD: /usr/bin/sendiq

Note: The better practice would be to create a new sudoers config file in ``/etc/sudoers.d/`` for
this policy with a command like ``sudo visudo -f /etc/sudoers.d/010_sendiq-nopasswd`` instead of
editing ``/etc/sudoers`` directly like I just showed you.
    

Policy kit permissions to Turn Off (Shut Down) the system
---------------------------------------------------------

The app allows you to properly turn off the Raspberry Pi system, but to be
able to do that, the user running the application must have permissions
to do that. To configure that permissions, do the following:

Create and edit a PolicyKit permission:

    $ sudo vim /etc/polkit-1/localauthority/50-local.d/allow_all_users_to_shutdown.pkla

And add there:

    [Allow all users to shutdown]
    Identity=unix-user:*
    Action=org.freedesktop.login1.power-off;org.freedesktop.login1.power-off-multiple-sessions
    ResultActive=yes
    ResultAny=yes

Reload the PolicyKit:

    sudo systemctl daemon-reload


Installation in virtual env
===========================

**1)** Install all necessary packages:

    sudo apt-get install virtualenv virtualenvwrapper

**2)** Add the next two lines at the bottom of your ``~/.profile`` file:

    export WORKON_HOME=~/.virtualenvs
    source /usr/share/virtualenvwrapper/virtualenvwrapper.sh

Note: If you have ~/.bash_profile file, then you need to add it there
as in that case the ``~/.profile`` won't be read.

**3)** Create a virtual env

    mkvirtualenv \
        --system-site-packages \
        --python=/usr/bin/python3 \
        rpi-sdr-replay

Note: We are allowing system site python packages to be available in our
virtual env here.

**When you are ready to work** on the new virtual env

    workon rpi-sdr-replay

**Once you are done** deactivate the virtual env

    deactivate


Debugging
=========

Bluetooth
---------

Bluetooth live debugging:

    sudo btmon

Some other tips for bluetooth debugging:
https://fedoraproject.org/wiki/How_to_debug_Bluetooth_problems

RTL-SDR
-------

Test RTL-SDR dongle

    rtl_test
